In this video we're going to go ahead
and download and install IntelliJ IDEA,
which is the editor or integrated
development environment ide that we're
going to be using in this course for our
programs. Now there are other IDEs
available for python programming and if
you're happy with the ide that you're
already using, that's fine there's no
need to install another one. We had to
pick one for this course but you can
take this course with any ide
that supports python. Now this particular
video is for the Windows platform, if
you're running a Mac or you're running
on Linux there are separate videos for
both those operating systems in this
course, so refer to those videos as
appropriate but if run Windows you're in
the right place,
let's get started. You know if you've
installed lots of software on your
computer, you may be tempted to run
through the installation without waiting
for me to do with this video, now that's
fine but watch out for a dialog such as
the one you can see on screen asking for
permissions to allow access on private
networks you will more than likely see
that when you're installing or running
the IntelliJ for the first time and it's
very important that you do allow access
so watch out for that dialog. Now the
option you want to tick here is the
Private Networks box depending on your
version of Windows you may have the
public networks box ticked by default
which in itself is a bit strange because
it doesn't say that that option isn't
recommended so whenever you do see this
dialog make sure you tick the box to
allow access on private networks and
then untick the other box so what that
does is configure your windows firewall
so that IntelliJ IDEA can access the
network and if you don't tick the box
you have to configure your firewall
manually and that'll be a bit of a pain.
Alright, so JetBrains the maker of
IntelliJ IDEA
make two IDEs that are suitable for
Python programming IntelliJ IDEA as well
as Pycharm let's have a look at their
website at JetBrains.com and I'll talk
about the differences between the two.
Once we get there click on the tools tab
out here at the top and over here you
can see that time we've got IntelliJ
IDEA we've also got PyCharm there as well.
So for positive programming they look
identical, I'm going to be using this one
IntelliJ IDEA
but if you're wanting to use Pycharm
instead everything will look almost
exactly the same in the videos in this
course, you know PyCharm has the
advantage that you don't have to install
a python plugin it's basically a version
of IntelliJ IDEA that only does Python
but the advantage here of IntelliJ IDEA
is that it can be used for a whole range
of languages so if you're planning to
program in another language or perhaps
you've got an existing course from the
Learn Programming Academy range such as
the Java master class then IntelliJ IDEA
will probably probably be more suitable,
so for that reason we suggest you
install IntelliJ IDEA, hover over which
and which one that tell you're more
interested in selecting and then click
on the download link. Now the IDE
themselves come in two flavors,
there's the Ultimate Edition for
IntelliJ IDEA or the professional
Edition for PyCharm, they're both the
paid versions you can use them for 30
days but after that you have to purchase
a license to continue using them but
each version has also got a Community
Edition that is free for personal use.
Now there are some features missing in
the community versions but they're not
things you'd need to worry about all
learning Python, so I'm going to do is
just go back you know I go to IntelliJ
IDEA click home download you can see
that IntelliJ IDEA has got the Ultimate
Edition and the Community Edition but
you can see here there's also a feature
matrix that shows you the differences
between the functionality and the
Ultimate Edition and the Community
Edition but again it's not something you
need to worry about at this stage when
you're just learning to use Python in
quiet you get away with using the
Community Edition without any problems
and of course that's completely free and
if all of this doesn't mean much at the
moment don't worry about it just install
the Community Edition because you can
always change your mind later. So I'm
going to click on and download and
choose the Community Edition, now while
that's downloading you've got a moment
to start you'll see it's downloading
down the bottom there,
I'm gonna click on run and let that take
continued downloading so I'll mention
again that you don't have to install this IDE,
if you've already got one that you're
happy with for Python programming feel
free to use that, but again we had to
pick one and because I've created
courses for a number of languages of
picked an IDE that supports the more in
IntelliJ IDEA you know I'll be showing
you ways that IntelliJ can help you to
find bugs in your code and some other
features that modern ideas have to make
programming easier.
Most modern IDEs will have similar
features and don't want you to know that
something is possible you can Google
have to do the same thing in any other
ID that you've chosen the other thing I
can do is also extend the trial period
for IntelliJ IDEA
if you're considering purchasing the
Ultimate Edition, in other words if you'd
like more time to evaluate the Ultimate
Edition, so if that's something you're
interested in check that out in a later
lecture and it shows you how to get a
special key that you'll need to paste
into the Ultimate Edition to get the
extra ninety days trial so with the 30
days trial that it comes with, you'll get
an extra 90 days on top of that but
that's only in the ultimate edition you
need to download that separately if you
need need to but again just confirm that
the Community Edition will work just
fine in this course. Alright so I'm just
going to pause the video for a bit now
until it's finished downloading and then
we'll go through and continue the
installation. Okay so as you can see
we're just about at 100% on the download
now, I got the option to click on yes to
allow this setup to make changes to my
computer and the installation process is
going to start so I'm going to click on
next here I'm going to choose the
default we'll leave the default which is
the directory where IntelliJ IDEA is
going to be installed and I don't need
to make a change to that the default is
fine click on next. Now this bit here is
quite important you need to know whether
you're running a 32-bit or 64-bit
version of Windows. Now to find out which
version you're running on your computer
you want to get into the control panel
or settings on Windows 10 so Windows 10
which I'm running I'm just going to come down here
right-click on the little windows logo
windows icon click on settings and then
I'm going to go ahead and type in system
the top there in that little search box
and just type enough letters until I can
click on about your PC. So you see down
here it's telling me what my system type
is I'm using a 64-bit version of Windows
and importantly though don't get
confused with this bit over here x64
based process or ignore that the
important bit here is a 64-bit operating
system because it is possible
confusingly to have a 64-bit processor
but to be running a 32-bit version of
the Windows operating system, so you need
to know which version you're running
here and in my case you can see it says
64-bit operating system. So again the
important thing in here is to the left
so the other option that could
potentially come up there would be
32-bit version, so I'm going to close
that window now. I'll go back to the
installation so in my case I'm going to
select 64-bit launcher and I'm also
going to leave this option down here
download and install JRE x86 by
JetBrains unticked with a 32-bit version
of Windows you'd want instead to click
on only the 32-bit launcher checkbox and
then you'd come down here and you check
on the download install JRE x86 by JetBrains
and if you have got a 32-bit version of
Windows and you don't do those two steps
you'll find that IntelliJ won't work for
you so again in my case I'm running a
64-bit version I've got that version
ticked I'm going to leave the JRE box
unticked and the other options here is
these file associations I suggest you
click these three Association checkboxes
that just enables those particular
languages that if you click on a file
it'll automatically open that file in
IntelliJ IDEA, so I'm going to do that
select those three boxes it's usually
what you want to do and then you want to
click on next and then I'm going to
click on install. Alright so I'm just
going to fast forward this little bit
I have been a time and we'll
come back after it's finished start this
installation step.
Now I can see we're just about finished
now with the installation step
the last thing we've got left to do now
is to click on this checkbox so that we
can run IntelliJ IDEA and by the way if
you happen to have been running
installing well the PyCharm and have the
same option you just click on that check
check box to run PyCharm in my case
we've downloaded install IntelliJ IDEA
so check that and click on finish and
that'll start IntelliJ IDEA for the
first time. Now the first time you do set
this up you'll usually see this option
and it's coming up telling us that we've
got an option to import some settings
now that would be useful if you're
running IntelliJ, you oven or you've
installed a previous version and you
want to retain the settings that you've
configured. Now in this case so I'm going
to choose do not import settings which
is actually the default option for me
here otherwise there's a location found
by IntelliJ and you could select that
and then get IntelliJ or import those
settings and use them in your
installation of IntelliJ but again you
can see in this case that I've got the
option to choose a custom location but
that actually is the version that I'm
downloading, so in my case I'm going to
click on do not import settings and
click ok. Now if you're actually in
Europe because of the new privacy
legislations in force from the 25th of
May, there's a screen that may pop up for
you and you need to accept the privacy
policy if that does so if you do see a
screen about privacy policy scroll down
to the bottom you need to do that for
the accept button to become enabled and
then click on ok. So don't worry at this
point if you haven't seen a privacy
policy, you can see in my case I didn't
see that that's because I'm not in the
UK. Next we go to a configuration section
to just set up some settings and to tell
IntelliJ what options we want so this is
the theme and you can see the one on the
left for me has got a dark background
and the one on the right has got a white
background and that could be reversed
depending on the version that you're
installing the select which one you
prefer to work with knowing that you can
always change it later so what I'm going
to do is come over here and select the
one with the white background because I
think that comes out better in videos
but you can choose whichever one you
like in that scenario we're gonna click
on next you know got this screen that
pops up there's a series of plugins on
the screen and you can choose all sorts
of things what I suggest you do is leave
this as it is for now and come back
later if you decide you want to install
plugins because you can do that at any
time and one thing to note is if you're
running the ultimate edition of IntelliJ
you'll have more options to install more
plug-ins for that this point I'm going
to leave that and click on next over
here and we get to this option for
featured plugins the same deal here if
you want to change or install these
things which we aren't going to use in
this particular course you can do that
now but I'm going I'm going to actually
skip both of those and click on the
start using IntelliJ IDEA, you can see
that's no loading up alright so the
first thing we're going to do you know
that we've got IntelliJ installed and
that we've been through that first set
up is to install the Python plugin. Now
this is a plug-in that's been developed
by IntelliJ so that it supports Python
within the IDE now if you decided to
install PyCharm instead you can skip
this step and that's because pochamp
automatically includes the Python
component so it doesn't need the python
plug-in to be installed separately but
do make sure in that scenario if you
have installed pycharm that you do watch
the next video where we configure python
that and change some other useful
settings because that will apply to you.
Now the python plug-in though it keeps
IntelliJ IDEA the same capabilities as
pycharm for Python programming so I'm
going to come down here and click on
configure then I'm going to select
plugins in the search box at the top of
the screen, I'm going to type in Python
then I'm if I come down here and click
on install JetBrains
plug-in you can see we've got some
options here we want to choose this one
down here python community edition we
want to choose the one that's basically
from JetBrains these other two other
products from other vendors they want to
choose the JetBrains one and you can see
it's general you got the largest number
of downloads as wel, I'm going to go
ahead and click on install over here and
you can see that's downloading the plugin
and it'll want us to restart IntelliJ
IDEA. Notice how the buttons changed now
we've got an option to restart IntelliJ
IDE, I'm going to click on that
click on ok we've got the option to
restart so I'm gonna click on restart
you can see IntelliJ IDEA is now
restarting and this point we've actually
finished IntelliJ is restarted so I'll
stop the video here in the next one
though we're going to make sure that the
Python plugin is configured correctly
but also we're going to make some
changes to some other settings to make
Python a bit easier to use and once
again that applies to both IntelliJ IDEA
as well as Pycharm so the steps in the
next video will be the same for IntelliJ
IDE and pycharm,
so be sure to watch it even if you
installed Pycharm instead. See you in the
next video.